---
layout: post
title:  "Thanks Pandoc!"
date:  2025-01-14 
categories: writing, computers
---

Well hello there!
I said I'd write some blog posts here, so here's one.

I've been playing around and learning GNU/Linux and the Bash Shell and gosh darnit if it isn't well worth my time.
I'm probably a bit late to the game.
I've never been a "computer guy" and never really wanted to be.
The thing is, computers, by themselves, aren't worth much.
But when they help me do what I want to do---that's when I get interested.
The main reason I ended up learning all this was a combination of being fed up with a bunch of big companies who decided to pull (or, more often, [enshittifiy](https://pluralistic.net/2022/11/28/enshittification/)) their products right when I needed them.
Let me introduce you to one that saved my butt today.

[Pandoc](https://pandoc.org/) is a document converter I learned about, oh, a year ago or so.
I really got into it because I learned that I could write very easily in [Markdown](https://programminghistorian.org/en/lessons/sustainable-authorship-in-plain-text-using-pandoc-and-markdow) and then use this nifty converter to turn it into basically anything I needed.
Word document?
Sure!
PDF?
Yep!
LaTeX?
Of course!
HTML?
I didn't know I needed to, but yes.
But up until today it was simply a nifty way to write without using an online service.
(Why is everything an online service now?)
In order to use it you've got to learn the command line, [but that's not so hard](https://programminghistorian.org/en/lessons/intro-to-powershell) [as you might think](https://programminghistorian.org/en/lessons/intro-to-bash), especially once you discover the advantages.

Anyway, my co-author and I have been working on a paper that, we think, should go in a science journal.
But scientists don't take you seriously unless you write in LaTeX.
My co-author, though, doesn't speak LaTeX.
(Again, it's not so hard to learn, but it's a hurdle.
If you want to learn, start with [this book](https://tobi.oetiker.ch/lshort/lshort.pdf).
It's a lot better than trying to figure stuff out on StackExchange.)
So when we got our most recent rejection the other day (cost of doing business), my co-author wanted to jump back on the horse and get revising.
But I didn't want to hold his hand, and I definitely didn't want to painstakingly go through and copy/paste his changes into the LaTeX document---sadly, that's what we'd been doing *before* today.
But I thought I'd give converting the document into Word a shot.
It worked great!
All the images, equations, citations, and (most of the) formatting came along for the ride!
What would have taken me hours took a few seconds on the command line.
Amazing.

Will it work the other way---from docx to tex?
Probably not as well (LaTeX is just richer), but it'll give me a good head start!

Next time maybe I'll tell you about editing PDFs *without* that one ubiquitous PDF editor.
